Add blog for ZenFlow (#7463)
deepspeedai/DeepSpeed: blogs/deepspeed-zenflow/README.md

---

## ZenFlow at a Glance

- **Zero GPU stalls:** Top-k important gradients are updated immediately on GPU; low-priority gradients are asynchronously processed on CPU—no GPU wait time.
- **Asynchronous and bounded:** ZenFlow decouples CPU and GPU execution with a bounded-staleness strategy that preserves convergence.
- **Auto-tuned:** ZenFlow adapts update intervals at runtime based on gradient dynamics—no need to tune manually.

---

## ZenFlow Highlights

ZenFlow is the **first offloading framework** to offer a **bounded-asynchronous** update scheme that preserves convergence while delivering **up to 5× end-to-end speed-up** over ZeRO-Offload.

### Performance

| Feature | Benefit |
|--------|---------|
| Up to **5×** end-to-end speed-up over ZeRO-Offload and **6.3×** over ZeRO-Infinity | Faster time-to-convergence |

> | **> 85% GPU-stall reduction** on A100 / H100 nodes | Keeps GPUs busy, higher utilization |

Reviewer: I think it is better to reword **> 85% GPU-stall reduction** in a positive way such as **> XX% increase in GPU utilization**

Reviewer: I change my mind a bit on this since **stall freedom** appears to be important messaging. In that case how about
```suggestion
| **> 85% reduction in GPU stalls** on A100 / H100 nodes | Keeps GPUs busy, higher utilization |
```

| **≈ 2× lower PCIe traffic** (1.13× model size per step vs. 2× in ZeRO) | Less bandwidth pressure on clusters |
| **Maintains or improves accuracy** on GLUE (OPT-350M → Llama-13B) | No accuracy loss |
| **Lightweight gradient-selection proxy** (6000× smaller than full AllGather) | Scales to multi-GPU settings without memory footprint spikes |
| **Auto-tuning (Zen-auto)** automatically adapts update interval on-the-fly | No manual knob tuning |

For more detailed performance results, please refer to our [arXiv paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.12242).

---

## Design Motivation

Training large models with offloading can save GPU memory, but often at the cost of *performance*. In this section, we briefly discuss three topics. **First**, we explain why coupling CPU-side optimizer updates with GPU compute leads to severe GPU stalls during LLM fine-tuning. **Next**, we quantify how full-gradient offloading saturates the limited PCIe bandwidth on A100/H100 servers, inflating iteration time. **Finally**, we reveal the highly skewed importance distribution of gradients, showing that uniformly updating all parameters in GPUs at the same time is wasteful and unnecessary.

> ### CPU-Induced GPU Stalls

Author: Thanks, that makes sense — "Offloading-Induced GPU Stalls" more accurately reflects the cause, as the stalls stem from the offloading mechanism rather than the CPU itself. I’ll go ahead and commit this suggestion.

<div align="center">
  <img src="./images/zenflow-no-overlap.png" alt="" width="1200" />

<div align="left">

*Figure 4:  CPU updates dominate step time, causing >60% GPU idle due to poor overlap with compute.*

Synchronous offloading frameworks (e.g., ZeRO-Offload) keep the GPU idle while the CPU performs a full optimizer step and transfers updated parameters back to GPU. For Llama-2-7B with 4× A100, the CPU path can take **longer than 4s** while the backward pass takes **approximately 2s**, so **over 60% of each iteration is pure GPU wait time**. Eliminating this serialization is essential for achieving high GPU utilization.

### Bandwidth Bottlenecks

> A single training step moves one full gradient matrix from GPU to CPU and one full parameter matrix back, i.e., **2× model size of PCIe traffic per step**. Even on PCIe 4.0 (≈ 32 GB/s), Llama-2-13B pushes ~40 GB per iteration, adding **> 1s** of transfer latency. The problem is worse in multi-node settings where cross-node network bandwidth (< 400 Gb/s) is an order of magnitude lower than that of NVLinks, making communication the dominant cost.

Reviewer: I think the use of **matrix** is distracting. 

```suggestion
A single training step moves a full copy of the model gradients from GPU to CPU and a full copy of the model parameters back, i.e., **2× model size of PCIe traffic per step**. Even on PCIe 4.0 (≈ 32 GB/s), Llama-2-13B pushes ~40 GB per iteration, adding **> 1s** of transfer latency. The problem is worse in multi-node settings where cross-node network bandwidth (< 400 Gb/s) is an order of magnitude lower than that of NVLinks, making communication the dominant cost.
```
